[music]
>> From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams
and this is The Daily. [music]
Since the war with Iran began, President
Trump has gone from urging Iranians to
take cover and protect themselves
[music]
to threatening to annihilate them. But
with the ceasefire set to expire this
[music] week, very little has been heard
from the Iranian people themselves.
Today,
>> [music]
>> my colleague Clare Tenis Getter speaks
to Iranians about how they view this
[music] war.
It's Tuesday, [music]
April 21st.
To the great proud people of Iran, I say
tonight that the hour of your freedom is
at hand.
The day the US and Israel launched its
joint military operation against Iran,
President Trump posted a video on Truth
Social. When we [music] are finished,
take over your government. It will be
yours to take. This will be probably
your only chance [music] for
generations. He urged the Iranian people
to rise up against the government.
>> Now is the time to seize control of your
destiny and to unleash the prosperous
and glorious future that is close within
your reach. This is [music] the moment
for action. Do not let it pass.
But then bombs started to fall.
People did not rise up. And so I
wondered, what did Iranians think of
this new war and the president's call to
action?
>> [music]
>> So I started reaching out to them.
In the first days of the war, I sent
nearly a hundred messages, mostly to
residents of Tehran, the site of some of
the heaviest bombing.
Still,
>> [music]
>> I heard nothing.
I could see most of my messages weren't
even being opened.
It wasn't that people didn't want to
talk.
They couldn't.
Not only is it extremely dangerous for
Iranians to speak to an American
journalist, [music]
phone calls could be monitored by the
regime.
>> Iran has been in the dark for days,
forced into a near total internet
blackout. But the bigger problem was a
communication blackout. [music]
>> Days have passed without word from
family and friends. The Iranian
government had effectively cut off the
country from the rest of the world.
The number I kept seeing was 99%.
>> [music]
>> 99% of Iranians who normally had access
to the internet now didn't.
I was trying to reach the remaining 1%.
These would be people with workarounds
like VPNs or enough money to afford
satellite communications like Starlink
[music] that could get them online for
even just a few minutes.
And then, almost a week into the war, my
colleagues and I got a few replies.
Hello?
Some of them only had enough internet to
send text messages.
But others were able to send short voice
memos. I'm in my own bedroom.
I can say [music]
we've been through a lot lately.
We heard a loud explosion.
>> We heard some loud bomb noises. At that
time, people were still reeling from the
war's initial shocks. I woke
>> And shortly after that, a huge cloud of
smoke drifted into our classroom.
Right now, the Iranian state media is
telling the people of Iran that the
Ayatollah has been killed. Iran's
supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali [music]
Khamenei, had just been killed in an
airstrike.
Many of the people I spoke with were
critical of the regime, like the vast
[music] majority of Iranians.
Their spirits seemed [music] high.
People in the streets
We were chanting slogans and making the
victory sign saying, "Military help from
Israel and the United States, it's here.
It finally happened.
They're here."
Then, there were the Iranians who
supported the regime.
Many of those people were grieving.
But others were angry and pledged to
fight against the American and Israeli
invaders.
One Iranian who supported the regime
said he heard [music] people chanting
"Death to Trump."
Every day the bombs are being dropped.
When it came to Trump's call to
overthrow the government, many of those
opposed to the regime said it didn't
make sense to the streets and protest.
It was too dangerous.
One source told me her friend's daughter
was shot and killed on the street by
what she described as pro-regime forces.
>> neighbor who was a civilian was killed
in an attack. Another told me her
neighbor was at work [music] when he was
killed by an airstrike.
We weren't able to verify these stories.
[music]
Still, there were other more complicated
reasons people hadn't done the thing
President Trump had imagined.
Reasons that were decades old
>> [music]
>> and rooted in the very idea of
resistance in Iran.
I found two people who told me that much
deeper story.
Two people who have very different views
on the war
>> [music]
>> and the best way to change Iran.
However you are comfortable, can you
introduce yourself to me?
What should I say?
I'm now living in Europe, but I'm living
here by force.
I reached a source who I'm going to
refer to by his first initial, C.
He was at his aunt's apartment in
Europe. [music]
He had left Iran just days before the
war broke out.
He initially tried to go back. His wife,
his family, they were all in Tehran.
But at that time, with airstrikes
[music] ongoing, there were no flights
back home. So you're stuck in waiting
for
>> [music]
>> to see what happens next.
Yeah, of course. Yeah, right.
It was a strange position to be in,
locked outside your country while it was
under attack.
But because he was in Europe,
>> [music]
>> he felt freer to open up to me about his
life in Iran.
Can you tell me a little bit about your
childhood? What it meant to you as a kid
to be Iranian?
I was a quiet person. [music] Both of my
parents worked outside and
uh C was born in the late '80s,
>> [music]
>> around the time when the Islamic
Republic was just a decade old.
He grew up in the outskirts [music] of
Tehran.
His mom worked an office job and his dad
was a mechanic.
>> [music]
>> They would both work long hours.
We were alone for a long time during our
childhood. So C and his sister spent a
lot of time with their grandfather.
And most of the time we went to mosque.
And
they were chanting "Death to America,
death to Israel." It was in the mosque
that he heard people chant "Death to
America."
He said it was a sentiment that he heard
in many places,
in school, on TV.
But it wasn't until he got a little bit
older that he really started to fixate
on those words. And I wondered why they
are chanting these slogans.
Why we are doing this?
God can't be like this.
That was the starting point to
questioning the whole system.
C wondered why Iran hated the West, why
some people, including his government,
claimed that believing in Islam and
being a good Muslim meant being [music]
against non-Muslim people.
But to even have these questions
>> [music]
>> was scary to C. I was scared a lot. He'd
heard stories of people being hanged for
not believing in the government's
messages. They made us believe all the
bad things will happen to you. [music]
So he tried to not have them at all.
He already felt like an outsider.
>> [music]
>> He was picked on and bullied at school.
>> They were bullying me.
>> So to quietly wonder why things were the
way they were made him feel even
lonelier.
He thought maybe he was even born in the
wrong place.
I had to [music] turn my feelings off to
live normal.
He would often escape into his own
world. He loved music and designing
things.
He once built his own handmade guitar.
>> [music]
>> I love creation any kind.
But [music] C's doubts only grew harder
and harder to ignore. My father Like
when he would ride in the car with his
dad, he'd listen to Queen or the Bee
Gees.
>> [music and singing]
>> And we were watching American movies and
>> And C himself would watch movies and
shows about Westerners. We could see how
they're similar to us.
So there wasn't a question that America
is our enemy.
One of his favorite things [music] to
watch was an anime adaptation of Anne of
Green Gables.
She was an outsider, just like him. I
just sympathized because my appearance
was similar to her. And he noticed other
things. Like [laughter]
in the school scenes, the boys and girls
weren't separated. They were together,
>> [music]
>> sitting side by side, interacting with
each other.
He wished his school was like that.
So much so that before going to sleep at
night, he would imagine himself sitting
in that classroom.
As the years passed, C's thoughts
shifted from doubts to disbelief.
Disbelief in Islam, disbelief in his
government, disbelief in the supreme
leader,
where, in his mind, all of this came
from. Everything they told us from the
beginning was a big lie.
But he largely kept his feelings a
secret
until holding them in became unbearable.
Suddenly, I
I have to do something to
to empty my mind from this.
One night around midnight,
>> [music]
>> when he was about 13 years old,
he took a black spray paint bottle to a
wall in his neighborhood,
and he spray painted a message.
I decide to write this to Khomeini.
Death to the Ayatollah. [music]
Because in my mind at that time, he was
the reason [music] for all our problems.
They were scaring us most of time, and
he ruined my best times of my whole
life. So, it was [music] kind of revenge
for me.
Mhm.
And also, I tried to [music]
tell other people that you are not alone
thinking [music]
this way.
Right after he wrote the message,
[music] he was scared.
If he was caught, he could be severely
punished.
But when that didn't [music] happen,
he started to feel lighter.
I felt
sense of relief.
>> [music]
>> This was his first act of protest.
And as the years went by, he realized he
wasn't alone.
First in conversations with friends and
even family. The first one was an
accident.
>> during one of the last years he was in
high school,
while he was on his way home from the
grocery store, he accidentally came upon
a mass protest. That was the first
moment I saw lots of people chanting
anti-governmental
slogans. That was like the French
Revolution. When he saw that, he
realized [music] many Iranians were
keeping secrets like his. Well, I
thought I'm not alone. [music]
And most people like think like me or
feel like me.
>> [music]
>> And many wanted change. Lots of people
were against this regime.
So, he eventually decided to join them.
And for nearly every demonstration in
Tehran after that, C has he protested,
too. I went to almost all of them.
He was protesting for an end to the
regime.
He wanted a democracy.
Supporters of Iran's pro-reformist
candidate have taken to the streets of
Tehran. And as the years went by, with
new waves of crowds that formed over
various issues,
he thought that if enough people showed
up, change would be possible.
So, this past January, when there were
nationwide protest, he went out to the
streets again in Tehran.
He told me that he went to a bridge, and
he looked out at these overwhelming
crowds of people.
It was
unbelievable.
And we realized that we are a lot.
We can defeat them.
They can't [music]
rule us forever.
>> [music]
>> But
after few minutes,
they started to shooting people.
Iran security forces opened fire on
protesters in at least six different
neighborhoods in Tehran. Shooting people
into their heads. There were accounts of
people being shot in the head, in the
eyes.
rooftops Similar massacres were
unfolding in cities across the country.
Everybody were running, and uh
we were scared.
It's unclear how many people were killed
by security forces.
One human rights organization estimates
the number to be around 7,000, but it
could be even larger.
The killings squelched the protest in a
matter of days.
Later, C saw photos of some of the
protesters who were killed. And I
saw people's faces.
>> [snorts]
>> People like me,
young people, beautiful people.
People were
fighting
for a normal life.
And
I thought
I could be one of them.
Right.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm so sorry.
C was shaken.
He decided it would take something
bigger than protest to oust the regime.
We couldn't find any other solution
rather than war. So, you were in some
ways hopeful that there would be a war?
I cannot call it hopeful.
It was
out of desperation.
And that's when the war started. I was
waiting for that moment.
>> Was C at his aunt's apartment in Europe?
I was worried for my family at first,
and I wondered what should I do next.
Since he couldn't get safely back into
the country, he watched the war from a
distance.
And as key leaders in the regime were
killed one by one, like many Iranians,
he felt optimistic.
But as days turned into weeks,
he also knew the war was taking a toll
on Iranians. I know hearing those
missiles nearby, it can be horrible. He
knew this from his own experience in the
12-day war last summer, when nuclear
facilities were bombed.
But this war was different.
>> [music]
>> Intense US and Israeli bombardment had
damaged and sometimes destroyed
factories, schools, hospitals, and
homes. [music]
Thousands of Iranians have lost their
jobs, with estimates of more than a
million people out of work, and more
than 1,700 civilians have been killed.
Now to the latest in the war with Iran.
President Trump says a whole
civilization will likely die tonight.
And when President Trump threatened to
end Iran's civilization,
C was worried his family would be among
them.
He also was having a hard time getting
in touch with them since the war.
The communications blackout kept their
conversations short. My wife is But his
wife told him she was worried the US
would drop a nuclear bomb on Iran.
His wife disagreed with his hope around
the war.
So, it became harder and harder to talk
about. She has different ideas acting
against the regime.
And
she always blame people like me that
wanted to get rid from this regime.
You know, this is the new that people
are suffering from war. If you didn't
protest, everything could be better.
Some people
would be still alive.
C once again finds himself in a lonely
position. But I think this is the cost
of getting rid of this regime.
And we have to pay it.
Urgent developments tonight as President
Trump announces he's agreed to suspend
the bombing
>> And that's why when news of the
ceasefire came
and the regime was still standing,
he felt mixed feelings.
>> [music]
>> He's now on his way back home.
He's happy to get to return to his
family
and his favorite things like his guitar.
But he doesn't quite know what Iran he's
returning to
>> [music]
>> or what his role will be in shaping it.
Do you still believe in protest as a way
to achieve change?
No, not at all.
I think [music]
it doesn't work.
And it's not a good time [music] to
protest.
He told me that he still holds on to the
possibility that maybe the ceasefire
will fall apart. Maybe the war will
start up again.
And while he's worried about what that
might mean for the country and its
people, he hopes that the US and Israeli
militaries will accomplish what protest
couldn't.
I'm still [music]
hoping.
I'm still hoping.
>> [music]
[music]
>> After the break, Claire has the story of
another Iranian and what they've been
thinking as they've seen the war unfold.
We'll be right back.
I heard from another Iranian
who is going by F to protect her
identity.
I don't know why the road is so bad
here.
Um
When I first got in touch, F was in her
car
on the road in Turkey after fleeing the
war.
We thought everybody is going out of the
city, but actually no one is going out.
She introduced herself to me in a voice
memo.
I'm just uh jumping quickly to the
answers. I hope that it will help you.
Um F is about 40 years old.
>> I'm a translator from English to Farsi.
She works as a book translator and
musician. We are childless by choice and
And she lives with her husband in a
well-off neighborhood in Tehran in a
home they didn't expect to leave.
On the morning of February 28th,
F was getting ready to go to a yoga
class when she looked out her window.
Yeah, I was sitting on the third floor
of my apartment and I heard
like a
I don't know, a rocket or something.
Then I realized that okay, it's started.
She gathered empty vodka bottles left
over from parties she'd hosted
>> [music]
>> to fill with water.
She read as much news as she could I
thought uh the internet will go away.
and prepared to hunker down.
But the sounds of the explosions became
too much for F. sound of explosions. She
told me it felt as if a trauma in her
body had been awakened. And um
Yeah, that's it.
And later, when she was out of her car
and getting ready to go to sleep, she
told me about where those feelings came
from.
Okay, so I now found time to
uh reply to the rest of the questions.
Um
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> How to put it?
I didn't actually have a very rich
childhood because my parents were very
ordinary people.
When F was a child, her parents were
both teachers living on a modest income.
They were supporters of the revolution
that created the Islamic Republic in
1979.
And a year later, when Iraq invaded
Iran,
they did what they could to back the
regime in its war effort. The government
would give them a flat in After F and
her sister were born, her dad took a
teaching job near the front lines and
the whole family moved.
>> Wait, my mom was so like ideological and
revolutionary that she insisted to my
dad to go also to the front lines, you
know, of the war. So She said her dad
even joined the fight for 8 months.
It was intense for a child. Like I
remember running to the safe place in
the garden, which was dark in the ground
when the planes would come. But beyond a
few flashbacks, F says she remembers
very little about the war.
And when it ended, she said she had a
simple childhood.
Her household and school were modeled
around the regime and religion.
F often went to Friday prayers and
revolution anniversaries. wear hijab And
she always wore a hijab like the girls
in her class. There was also music. She
was drawn to music.
But music is totally like haram, you
know, banned. But the regime effectively
banned women from singing.
To this day, women are not allowed to
sing solo in public. So music was
forbidden in our home because of
religious reasons, because there are
some So it was mostly absent at home.
As a little girl, F remembers her mom
quietly humming songs under her breath
while working in the kitchen,
but not truly singing.
What was allowed in their house was
reciting the Quran.
And F was good at it. Um
I I will recite the first sura, you
know, it's the first She still remembers
many of the verses.
It was really something that I liked.
>> [music]
>> F said she was so good that she was
called into the school office every
morning to recite the Quran during the
school's flag raising ceremony. They
were so like encouraging and
She says she competed in national Quran
reciting competitions
>> [music]
>> and she excelled.
>> [singing]
>> But it wasn't something she pursued as a
career. The best was [music] engineering
in the
>> She chose to study engineering.
They were mostly boys.
And for the first time, most of her
classmates were boys.
And I remember
sometimes they would tell us not to
take part in some things that were just
boys thing.
So Surrounded by boys, she became proud
of being a girl.
I didn't want to bow to the rules of,
you know,
boys are better, boys can do anything.
They can And so it was the beginning of
a transformation for her.
Then I stopped doing prayers.
She turned away from religion, stopped
praying,
and eventually stopped wearing the
hijab.
Then she took her values to the streets.
Yes, I went on the streets
and In 2009, F told me she joined
thousands of Iranians to protest the
re-election of the conservative
president at the time
in the so-called green movement.
Bloodshed in the streets of Iran. At
least seven people are reported to have
been shot and killed. The regime cracked
down on the protest, killing dozens and
arresting thousands. So then I think I
realized that this is not the way. It
was clear to F that the regime was too
strong. It will not work. It will make
things worse. She no longer [music] saw
the point in protesting.
I decided I don't want to actually
waste my energy [music] on something
that I see it is not possible.
F figured the best way to achieve change
wasn't to overthrow the regime
or even loudly protest it.
It was to quietly resist what she
disagreed with. [music] It's about
changing people's mindset.
And to F, that meant trying to model the
Iran she wanted to live in in her own
life.
>> [music]
>> Some of her changes were small. Freedom
of choice on clothing. Sometimes
literally only measurable in inches.
longer shoes like up to knees a little
bit down
>> Or a subtle difference in material.
Yeah, a blouse which was mesh, you know,
like you could F also said she changed
[music] the words in her marriage
contract for the divorce like we are
equal
>> the right to get divorced.
If I can
little by little change this part of the
society, which is very conservative and
religious, that they accept that I am
also a part of this society. I accept
they are also part of the society. Let's
just get along with each other.
This is the best way I think for Iran.
Years passed and she said she did see
Iranian society change.
Then I really started to, you know,
inspire others also and I would More
women on the streets of Tehran were
abandoning the hijab. When I saw that
women are actually not wearing it on the
street anymore,
it was really amazing. Although She says
male taxi drivers that used to refuse
her as a customer for not wearing a
hijab
now don't care.
And she started to push boundaries
through something she hadn't been able
to explore as a kid,
singing. [music]
She started singing traditional Persian
music.
First, she sang at home.
Then at parties with friends.
Eventually, she started planning a solo
concert even though this was still
forbidden as a woman.
>> [music]
>> It was openly in a place that would hold
[music] private concerts and the
sounding system was really good. And
just as with her other acts of
disobedience, F was pushing the
boundaries without completely rebelling
against the regime. [music] traditional
music, you know, For her concert, she
planned to sing traditional Iranian
music.
>> It was not pop. Not pop or other genres
associated with the West.
And she would have one man on stage with
her playing the kamancheh, a traditional
Persian instrument. Also activist, a
kind of musician. But she would be the
sole singer
with a lineup of songs about women.
>> [music]
>> The all the poems and all the music was
from women's movement. [music]
She said they sold tickets to about 80
people.
We were ready to
>> [music]
>> be captured and The night of the show,
she was nervous thinking she might be
arrested.
But she stepped out on stage and sang.
>> [music and singing]
>> And uh
really everything was the way I wanted.
She was able to have her concert, the
first time she ever got to sing like
that.
She looked into the audience and saw
women and men.
It was historical. I'm I'm telling you
it was really a something historical.
To her, it felt [music] like something
big was happening.
And
I can do I can do much more than this, I
know.
To F, it was evidence that this kind
[music] of resistance works.
And while F understands just how brutal
the regime can be, she has come to
believe that the only answer to reform
Iran's government is from within.
Which is why when the threat to the
regime came from the outside, through
the US and Israel, she was especially
against it.
United States and Israel are launching
air strikes across Iran. So, on that
first morning, watching the strikes from
her apartment window,
F already had a clear opinion.
She's happy to learn that Ayatollah
Khamenei was killed.
She even did a little dance.
And yet, she completely opposed the war.
And we filled in the car
the petrol and then
we hit the road.
While in Turkey, I asked F if she had
ever thought about leaving Iran for
good. I could have gone all my life to
other countries. She said she had
many times in her life. But then
my husband and I we think that we really
belong to this country. But a few years
ago, she decided she would stay, no
matter what.
And as she [music] watched the
destruction of Iran and heard about
President Trump's threat to destroy its
civilization,
she's found herself even more committed
to the country. [music]
She loves Iran deeply.
And she's decided she would rather live
there than anywhere else in the world.
It's so rich
in every aspect that you cannot go live
somewhere else.
You know, we need meaning and Iran is my
meaning of life.
>> [snorts]
>> I prefer
a hard life
with meaning
to an easy life empty.
So, it's like this, you know, for me.
>> [music]
>> So, 2 weeks ago, just before the
ceasefire was announced,
F and her husband left Turkey and went
back home to Tehran.
We arrived
last night.
>> [music]
>> I could hear the happiness in her voice.
Can you hear this noise from the
background? I'm at the Vali Square and
the what is going on here is like a
ceremony which I don't know if it is
every She's not sure [music] if the
ceasefire will last, but she's holding
on to hope.
You know, there is this
Arabic [music]
phrase.
It says "We are doomed
We are doomed to hope to have hope."
And so long as it does, she thinks
there's a chance to create [music]
change. Like have you seen this greenery
that grows on the corner of a sidewalk?
Even if it's only in the small spaces
where [music] change is possible.
Like weeds growing through cracks in the
sidewalk. It's really the sign the sign
of hope. It It shows that you're hopeful
that you stay alive and you stay
safe and you
keep growing.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Apple Chief Executive Tim Cook [music]
said that he would step down after
nearly 15 years, ending one of the most
successful management runs in the
history of American business.
Cook will move into a new role as
Apple's Executive Chairman in September.
And he'll be succeeded by John Turnus,
who's currently the head of hardware
engineering.
>> [music]
>> During Cook's tenure, Apple's annual
profit quadrupled to more than $110
billion
and its value ballooned more than
tenfold to $4 trillion. [music]
And
Laurie Chavez DeRemer,
>> [music]
>> President Trump's embattled Labor
Secretary, stepped down on Monday amid a
cloud of scandal and investigation,
marking the third member of his cabinet
to depart the administration in 2
months.
Chavez DeRemer was facing whistleblower
complaints of [music] professional
misconduct, including claims that she
was having an affair with a member of
her team and that she used department
resources for personal trips.
The Labor Department's Inspector
General's office found evidence [music]
that Chavez DeRemer and her staff
misused federal funds to pay for luxury
hotels, SUV rentals and meals. [music]
Today's episode [music] was reported and
produced by Claire Tennisgetter.
It was also produced by Jess Chung,
Ricky Novetsky and Lindsey Garrison with
help from Michelle Bondja and Ben
Calhoun. [music]
It was edited by Maria Burn, Lindsey
Garrison
>> [music]
>> and Michael Benoist.
With research help from Susan Lee and
Artemis Moshtaghian.
Original [music] music by Dan Powell and
Alicia Bateyew.
Additional music by Marion Lozano,
Sophia Landman, [music]
Pat McCusker and Leah Shaw Dameron.
Our theme music is by Wonderly. [music]
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
Special thanks [music] to Farnaz
Fassihi, Yara Bayoumy, Yeganeh Torbati,
Paren Behrouz, [music] Shirin Hakim and
Adrian Carter.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.